Add ALP support blog (#195)
apache/parquet-site: content/en/blog/features/alp_encoding.md

---
title: "ALP lightweight floating-point encoding in Apache Parquet"
date: 2026-07-08

> description: "The consensus building machine strikes again"

Reviewer: > The consensus building machine strikes again

I like this title subtitle, but I fear it may obscure the overall message of the blog post. Maybe something that focused on the benefits of ALP could be better -- for example something like

"Fast, random access, GPU and SIMD-friendly compression and decompression; similar in size to ZSTD"

author: "[Konstantin Tarasov](https://github.com/sdf-jkl)"
categories: ["features"]
---

## What is ALP?

> ALP (Adaptive Lossless floating-Point) is a new lightweight floating-point encoding that shows a better compression ratio than heavyweight compressors like zstd **and** faster [de]compression speed than other lightweight floating-point encodings.

Reviewer: > ALP (Adaptive Lossless floating-Point) is a new lightweight floating-point encoding that shows a better compression ratio than heavyweight compressors like zstd and faster [de]compression speed than other lightweight floating-point encodings.

I think a better characterization is probably that it shows a similar compression ratio (TODO we should verify with the paper).

Another key benefit of ALP is that it supports "random access" -- a single value can be deocded without decoding the entire page. This property is becoming increasingly important for increasingly important workloads such as point lookups with text and vector indexes.

You touch on this with the Why but I think it would be good to put it in the intro too

> It was developed by the folks at [CWI](https://www.cwi.nl/en/research/database-architectures/) and uses smart tricks to represent floating-point data as integers.

Reviewer: > It was developed by the folks at CWI and uses smart tricks to represent floating-point data as integers.

Perhaps it would be better to list the full name "Computer Architectures Group at CWI" rather than "the folks"

ALP shines at data like:
- Monetary values (exchange rates, public funds, stocks, prices, etc.)
- Geographic coordinates (longitude/latitude)
- Scientific measures (temperature, pressure, speed, degrees, energy, etc.)

> - Timestamps stored as floating-point

Reviewer: > ALP shines at data like:

The examples here are great and I suggest you keep them.

I also think it would also help to summarize the general characteristics of data that ALP works well on. Specifically I think ALP works well for values stored using Floating point types but that do not need a full 32 or 64 bits of precision, such as limited range integers and decimal values. All your examples I think fall into this class

## Why ALP?

### Better physical data representation

Better, faster, stronger? But how much?

> <!-- Compression ratio table here I think the paper one looks better, but it's not really exactly the same -->

Reviewer: Yeah,  I agree  that before publishing this blog, we should get some real numbers / a chart. I know Prateek has some in the original spec https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PlyUSfqCqPVwNt8XA-CfRqsbc0NKRG0Kk1FigEm3JOg/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.5xf60mx6q7xk, 

or maybe we  can create some new numbers / charts as part of the post (with the Rust encoder/decoder or the C++ one)

The key metrics to report for several datasets
1. Compression/Decompression speed (in GB/sec) and encoded size
2. Compare ALP with no compression, and PLAIN encoding with ZSTD compression, and PLAIN encoding with Snappy compression (default in duckdb)

[De]compression speed improvement depends on the Parquet reader/writer implementation, but users can expect performance similar to what the paper reports.

<!-- Compression/decompression table here -->

> ### The most efficient way to read is to not read at all

Reviewer: I think highlighting the feature (Random Access) would be good

```suggestion
### Random Access: The most efficient way to read is to not read at all
```

One of the [gripes users have with Parquet](https://sympathetic.ink/2025/12/11/Column-Storage-for-the-AI-era.html) is that it is not optimized for random access. The minimum amount of data you need to decompress and decode in Parquet is usually an entire page.

> ALP encoding avoids that by splitting the page into vectors (usually 1024 values each, sized for SIMD and for fitting in L1 cache). Each vector stores the necessary metadata to decode any row inside.

Reviewer: > ALP encoding avoids that by splitting the page into vectors (usually 1024 values each, sized for SIMD and for fitting in L1 cache). Each vector stores the necessary metadata to decode any row inside.

The finalized spec in https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/pull/557 

> | 2 | log_vector_size | 1 byte | uint8 | log2(vector\_size). Must be in the inclusive range \[3, 15\]. Recommended default: 10 (vector size 1024) |

Allows for vectors between 8 and 32K sizes, so I think we can make this more specific like

"ALP encoding avoids that by encoding values into one or more vectors (between 8 and 32K, defaults to 1024, chosen by the writer), sized for SIMD and for fitting in L1 cache). Each vector stores the necessary metadata to decode any row inside."

**Before**, reading a single value:

> Load the whole page → decompress and decode all of it → retrieve the value

**After**, with ALP:

> Load just the page metadata → get the vector offset → decode only that vector

This introduces a finer read granularity than the Parquet page and can significantly speed up single-row decodes and random access.

## Technical overview

ALP takes inspiration from [PDE (Pseudodecimal encoding)](https://www.cs.cit.tum.de/fileadmin/w00cfj/dis/papers/btrblocks.pdf) and heavily improves on it.

> PDE works by finding the smallest integer, paired with a decimal exponent, that represents the floating-point value exactly.

Reviewer: I recommend we refocus the text on the details of ALP as it is incorporated into Parquet rather than the history / connection to PDE (people can refer to the ALP academic paper for the contrast to PDE). I like the example you have here -- maybe we could expand that idea with a worked example by picking  a few other values and walking the reader through how it would be encoded

For example, I think we could choose the following set where some can be lossless encoded with exponent/factors but where there will be two exceptions (to cover the two classes): NaN and a large value

```text
100.2
100.52
101.1
100.48
-999999999999.0
100.2
NaN
```

Then, at the appropriate step in the "ALP Encoding pipeline in Parquet", you could  show how those values are encoded, how it would choose of e and f for the data, and then make a diagram of how it would then be encoded and packed, and then show how decoding works.

I can help make diagrams / figures for this if you would like (I love a good diagram... or 3!)

For example:

> 8.0605 can't be physically represented in [IEEE 754](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8766229) as is, and is instead approximated as 8.06049999999999933209.
>
> PDE takes the value and brute-force searches over exponents, computing `significand = round(value × 10^e)` for each.
>
> For this value it arrives at significand 80605 with exponent 4.

The catch is that PDE stores an exponent for every single value.

The key ideas behind ALP are:
- the majority of floating-point values share similar decimal precision within vectors
- there is a huge benefit in vectorizing the encoding

The first idea leads to an improvement over PDE. Instead of storing an exponent per value, we store it per vector. This way we get a much smaller metadata footprint.

> The second idea uses SIMD intrinsics to make the code as parallelizable as possible to achieve greater [de]compression speeds.

Reviewer: > " The second idea uses SIMD intrinsics"

FWIW I think the SIMD intrincisc is a specific implementation detail of C++ that might or might not apply to each reader and writer implementation. I suggest instead we focus the post more on the fact that the encoding and decoding are "SIMD-friendly" and readers and writers can achieve very high compression and decompression.

### ALP Encoding pipeline in Parquet

> The way that ALP encodes data is:

Reviewer: > ALP Encoding pipeline in Parquet

I also think we should add a section for "ALP Decoding Pipeline" that shows how to decode the encoded values from the previous section. That will let us both explain more how it works as well as illustrate the properties above (its compactness and that you could decode a single row)

Also with diagrams :) (and again I could help)

    |  4. BIT PACKING                                          |
    |     bit_width = ceil(log2(max_delta + 1))                |
    |     Pack each delta into bit_width bits                  |
    +----------------------------------------------------------+
                              |
                              v
                   Output: Serialized vector bytes

**1. Choose parameters**

First, sample multiple vectors within a row group to find the overall best combinations of exponent and factor.

Then re-evaluate those candidate combinations on each vector to pick the pair that compresses it best.

**2. Decimal encoding**

Encode each value with the formula above, then round-trip it (decode it back) to make sure it matches the original.

If the round-trip fails, the value is added to the vector's exceptions list.

**3. Frame of reference (FOR)**

Once the values are encoded as integers, we pick the smallest one as the frame of reference. Every value is then stored as its delta from that minimum.

**4. Bit packing**

Finally, we take the bit width of the largest delta and pack every delta into that many bits.

> ### ALPrd

Reviewer: > "ALPrd"

I think the ALPrd mention, while correct, will distract from the focus on Parquet. I suggest we frame this more on what cases ALP won't work well for.

For exmaple, something like

> not all floating point data can be exploited by ALP, for example vector embeddings typically span the full floating point range and do not encode well with ALP. Such usecases can continue to Apache use existing Parquet features such as PLAIN or BYTE_STREAM_SPLIT encoding followed by  ZSTD or SNAPPY general purpose decompression.

The ALP paper also introduces an ALPrd encoding, used when ALP can't compress enough of the values in a row group. Apache Parquet already provides a similar mechanism via BYTE_STREAM_SPLIT + ZSTD, so ALPrd was not included.

## Ecosystem adoption

> The paper was published in 2024 and now has a sibling [G-ALP](https://ir.cwi.nl/pub/35205/35205.pdf) optimized for GPUs.

Reviewer: > Ecosystem adoption

I would recommend fousing this section on the ALP adoption within the Parquet community (and maybe here highlight the efforts of the community to get it ready, and that we now have implementations in the open source C++, Java, and Rust implementations that we expect to ship in the next several months

We can probably consolidate the mentions of other systems adopting ALP in the intro section as additional motivation for adopting it in Parquet. Perhaps something like "ALP has already been implemented in new formats such as Vortex, several academic systems such as BtrBlocks, and F3, and FastLanes, and in tightly integrated open source systems such as the DuckDB file format (which originated at the same CWI lab as ALP)."

  </div>
  <div class="col-12 col-md-6">
    <img src="/blog/alp/avg_decompression_speed.png" alt="Average decompression speed benchmark" class="img-fluid">
  </div>
  <div class="col-12 col-md-6">
    <img src="/blog/alp/avg_random_access.png" alt="Average random access benchmark" class="img-fluid">
  </div>
  <div>
    <b>Figure 1</b>: Average compression ratio, compression speed, decompression speed, and random access performance of <code>PLAIN+ZSTD</code> (per-page <code>zstd</code> compression) and <code>ALP</code> across <code>30</code> datasets on three machines. Higher is better.
     Random access speed is measured by decoding <code>100</code> deterministic, uniformly distributed rows from <code>city_temperature_f</code>.
  </div>
  <p/>
</div>

The numbers reported are for the pre-release Rust implementation of ALP. We expect
the performance of ALP encoders to improve as the implementations are optimized and
tuned. The current implementations are already faster than `zstd` in many cases,
even though most `zstd` implementations have already been heavily optimized.

## Technical overview

> ALP was developed by the [Database Architectures Group at CWI](https://www.cwi.nl/en/research/database-architectures/) 

Reviewer: Should we lead with its provenance ? Maybe it would be better to name the authors directly instead of the CWI group?

### ALP Performance

As shown in the charts below, users can expect ALP to be `10x` faster to decode
than `zstd` and thousands of times faster to retrieve individual values, with
similar compression ratios and comparable compression speed.

The code and instructions to reproduce these results and try ALP with your own
Parquet datasets can be found in the [alp_benchmark](https://github.com/alamb/alp_benchmark) repository, with the Rust Parquet implementation included.

<div class="row g-3 td-max-width-on-larger-screens">
  <div class="col-12 col-md-6">
    <img src="/blog/alp/avg_compression_ratio.png" alt="Average compression ratio benchmark" class="img-fluid">
  </div>
  <div class="col-12 col-md-6">
    <img src="/blog/alp/avg_compression_speed.png" alt="Average compression speed benchmark" class="img-fluid">
  </div>
  <div class="col-12 col-md-6">
    <img src="/blog/alp/avg_decompression_speed.png" alt="Average decompression speed benchmark" class="img-fluid">
  </div>
  <div class="col-12 col-md-6">
    <img src="/blog/alp/avg_random_access.png" alt="Average random-access benchmark" class="img-fluid">
  </div>
  <div>

>     <b>Figure 1</b>: Average compression ratio, compression speed, and decompression speed of <code>PLAIN+ZSTD</code> (per-page <code>zstd</code> compression) and <code>ALP</code> across <code>30</code> datasets on three machines. Higher is better.

Reviewer 2: nit: it may help to clarify the distinction of encoding vs codec and `PLAIN` is the encoding while `ZSTD` is the codec. Since we are showing ALP without the codec can beat the plain + codec, it may make it easier for readers to understand thanks

     Random-access speed is measured by decoding <code>100</code> deterministic, uniformly distributed rows from <code>city_temperature_f</code>.
  </div>
  <p/>
</div>

The numbers reported are for the pre-release Rust implementation of ALP. We expect
the performance of ALP encoders to improve as the implementations are optimized and
tuned. The current implementations are already faster than `zstd` in many cases,
even though most `zstd` implementations have already been heavily optimized.

## Technical Overview

ALP was developed by Azim Afroozeh, Leonardo Kuffó, and Peter Boncz from the [Database Architectures Group at CWI](https://www.cwi.nl/en/research/database-architectures/)
and published in a [SIGMOD 2024 paper](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3626717). ALP takes advantage of a common pattern: many values stored as `FLOAT` or `DOUBLE` originated as decimal numbers with relatively few digits, such as prices or measurements. This section explains the intuition behind ALP. The following sections then explain the encoding and decoding pipeline in more detail.

> ALP encodes each floating-point value using three integer values: an encoded

Reviewer 3: I would probably talk about vectors here as well. Just because as a newcomer this is structured such that it seems like we have 3 independent values for each row. 2 of them happen to be shared by some rows but I think the structure here is actually important to know up front.

I'd probably say 

"ALP encodes floating-points in batches (vectors?) of integers encoded with shared integers  "exponent" (`e`), and a "factor" (`f`). Batches can vary in their defined exponent and factor and how exponent and factor are chosen is explained below. The original value is recovered by computing"

value, an "exponent" (`e`), and a "factor" (`f`). The exponent and factor are
shared by many values, and how they are chosen is explained below. The original
value is recovered by computing

<pre>
value = encoded × 10<sup>f</sup> × 10<sup>-e</sup>
</pre>

The calculation above uses floating-point arithmetic, which may round the result
to the nearest representable value instead of reproducing the original value.

> Because ALP is lossless, it stores the original full-precision

Reviewer 3: I'd invert this sentence,  currently it's
"outcome (store exceptions) -> condition (some values cannot be encoded-decoded)"
and switch it to 
"condition (some values cannot be encoded-decoded) -> outcome (store exceptions)"

like

Because ALP is lossless, a value which cannot be round-tripped is stored with it's original full-precision separately as an "exception".

I also would probably want to define "round-trip" here since I don't think that's been explained. I know it's shorthand for encoded and decoded but i'm not sure that's clear to a new reader.

- Input values: `123`, `245`, and `201` (`8` bits per value)
- Minimum value (frame of reference): `123`
- Final bit-packed values: `0`, `122`, and `78` (`7` bits per value)

{{% /alert %}}

### ALP Encoding and Decoding

The encoding pipeline is straightforward, as shown in the following example of
encoding a vector of values:

<!-- Diagrams source: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1NeYAGKV2wZZMSme5rVgUGGMkfOTEnxw8oCDxid5UouM -->
<div class="row g-3 td-max-width-on-larger-screens">
  <div class="col-12">
    <img src="/blog/alp/alp_encoding_example.png" alt="ALP encoding pipeline example" class="img-fluid">
  </div>
  <div>
    <b>Figure 3</b>: Encoding a vector of <code>1024</code> 64-bit floating-point values using ALP.
  </div>
  <p/>
</div>

To encode this vector, first the parameters <code>e = 4</code> and <code>f =
3</code> are chosen. Then the values are transformed to integers using the
formula <code>encoded = round(value × 10<sup>4</sup> × 10<sup>-3</sup>)</code>. Each integer is
checked by reversing the transformation with <code>decoded = encoded × 10<sup>3</sup> × 10<sup>-4</sup></code>. Values

> that do not reproduce the original value, such as `1234.5678` (which decodes to

Reviewer 3: nit: Another minor thing here but we already used an example exception above `8.0605123` which we could re-use here instead of introducing a new value. I know this would require remaking graphics though which is probably not worth the effort.

encodings.
See [the ALP Encoding specification] for
more details on how the parameters are chosen and how rounding and exception
handling work.

<!-- TODO verify this link after it has been published to the Parquet website -->
[the ALP Encoding specification]: https://parquet.apache.org/docs/file-format/data-pages/encodings/#ALP

Decoding a vector requires similar steps, but in reverse, as shown below.

<!-- Diagrams source: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1NeYAGKV2wZZMSme5rVgUGGMkfOTEnxw8oCDxid5UouM -->
<div class="row g-3 td-max-width-on-larger-screens">
  <div class="col-12">
    <img src="/blog/alp/alp_decoding_example.png" alt="ALP decoding pipeline example" class="img-fluid">
  </div>
  <div>
    <b>Figure 4</b>: Decoding a vector of <code>1024</code> values back to floating-point values using ALP.
  </div>
  <p/>
</div>

First, the bit-packed deltas are unpacked and the original values are computed
by <code>original = (3335 + delta) × 10<sup>3</sup> ×
10<sup>-4</sup></code>. Then any exceptions are "patched" by overwriting the
output array at the exception positions with the exception values.

> ## Ecosystem Adoption

Reviewer 2: Depending on the blog’s release timing, would it help to include a short "Try it yourself" section? Once ALP is available in a released implementation, we can show how to configure a Parquet writer to use it, including the required version. This would give readers a clear next step after reading the post.

Author: arrow-rs 60.0 is scheduled to release soon - https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs/issues/9880

https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs/pull/9372 should make it in and we could add a link to it and create a short demo.

---

> title: "ALP lightweight floating-point encoding in Apache Parquet"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "ALP: Adaptive Lightweight Floating-point Encoding in Apache Parquet"
```

date: 2026-08-14
description: "Fast, random access, GPU and SIMD-friendly compression and decompression; similar in size to ZSTD"

> author: "[Kosta Tarasov](https://github.com/sdf-jkl), [Andrew Lamb](https://github.com/alamb)"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: "[Kosta Tarasov](https://github.com/sdf-jkl), [Andrew Lamb](https://github.com/alamb), [Prateek Gaur](https://github.com/prtkgaur)"
```

categories: ["features"]
---

Apache Parquet adopts ALP (Adaptive Lossless floating-Point) -- a new lightweight floating-point encoding that shows similar compression ratio to heavyweight compressors like zstd and **much** faster decompression speed + "random access" support.

> "Random access" is a key feature of ALP -- it allows retrieving a single value without decoding the entire page. This property is becoming increasingly important for workloads such as point lookups with text and vector indexes.

Reviewer: I think we should also mention the friendliness to modern hardware (SIMD and GPU as well). Maybe something like 

```suggestion
Apache Parquet has added ALP (Adaptive Lossless floating-Point) -- a new lightweight floating-point encoding with similar compression to heavyweight compressors like zstd and **much** faster decompression speed, supports random access, and is SIMD and GPU friendly. 
```

Then we can fill out the claims in the sections of the article

----

ALP was developed by the [Database Architectures Group at CWI](https://www.cwi.nl/en/research/database-architectures/) and uses smart tricks to represent floating-point data as integers.

> ALP shines at data that was originally decimal and stored as FLOAT/DOUBLE:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ALP shines on values that represent DECIMAL but are modeled as FLOAT/DOUBLE:
```

Reviewer: Maybe also worth mentioning this double modeling is very common in real world workloads (for example, Numpy and pandas don't include a decimal type defauly -- e.g. https://numpy.org/devdocs/user/basics.types.html)

- Monetary values (exchange rates, public funds, stocks, prices, etc.)
- Geographic coordinates (longitude/latitude)
- Scientific measures (temperature, pressure, speed, degrees, etc.)
- Timestamps stored as floating-point

## Why ALP?

> Encoding floating point data is a complicated engineering problem. Prior to ALP the only FLOAT/DOUBLE encoding in Parquet (other than Plain) was [Byte Stream Split](https://parquet.apache.org/docs/file-format/data-pages/encodings/#BYTESTREAMSPLIT). Byte Stream Split does not reduce the size of data but *can* make the compression ratio and speed better when a heavyweight compressor is used afterwards.

Reviewer: It would be good to say why "it is a complicated engineering problem"  -- for example that floating point data can vary widely between datasets and can have wide ranges of distributions. You could then also make the point that many datasets don't actually use the full range of floating point numbers and that ALP exploits that observation

Using heavyweight compression, however, introduces two problems:
- Slow decompression speed

> - Requires decoding the entire page to retrieve a single value (the "random access" problem)

Reviewer 4: Another way to say above.
```
Heavyweight compression buys that ratio at two costs:
   - Decode speed — decompression runs well below what a scan can consume.
   - Random access — reading one value means decoding the whole page.
```

> ALP succeeds at solving both of these problems without losing compression ratio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ALP is designed to solve both of these problems for common data patterns, while achieving a similar compression ratio.
```

### Benchmark

To demonstrate ALP's performance we used the same datasets used in the paper.

- The first 13 are time series data, mostly scientific measurements
- 17 datasets are more representative of
doubles stored in classical database workloads, mostly monetary data

> <details><summary>Full list of datasets </summary>

Reviewer: I feel like this detail on experimental setup and detailed results is obscuring the main narrative. 

I recommend we
1. Add a summary chart with results
1.  move all these details to an Appendix at end of the blog
2. Make sure we link somewhere so that anyone who cares can reproduce these numbers 

In terms of reproducer, i recommend we create a repository with the benchmark runner script pulled otu (rather than a branch in arrow-rs) and we can link there. I can do this if it would help

Reviewer: I made some example summary diagrams for consideration:

<img width="1080" height="920" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/01a3250d-4bbc-4125-82eb-e558b7d519c1" />
<img width="1080" height="840" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d81a7926-855c-48ba-ab8c-e616c730367e" />
<img width="1080" height="840" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/50f2fcc7-3c32-4879-bcba-fdf413769da6" />

| ssd_hdd_benchmarks_f | PLAIN + ZSTD | 0.813 | 1.802 | 12.98 |
| ssd_hdd_benchmarks_f | BYTE_STREAM_SPLIT + ZSTD | 1.265 | 2.850 | 17.42 |
| ssd_hdd_benchmarks_f | ALP | 0.114 | 35.975 | 16.04 |
| stocks_de | PLAIN | 68.397 | 71.924 | 64.01 |
| stocks_de | PLAIN + ZSTD | 0.664 | 1.689 | 10.07 |
| stocks_de | BYTE_STREAM_SPLIT + ZSTD | 0.881 | 2.278 | 33.46 |
| stocks_de | ALP | 1.224 | 35.921 | 11.20 |
| stocks_uk | PLAIN | 60.600 | 64.531 | 64.01 |
| stocks_uk | PLAIN + ZSTD | 0.608 | 1.413 | 11.29 |
| stocks_uk | BYTE_STREAM_SPLIT + ZSTD | 1.180 | 4.006 | 14.89 |
| stocks_uk | ALP | 0.948 | 32.869 | 12.75 |
| stocks_usa_c | PLAIN | 64.214 | 67.851 | 64.01 |
| stocks_usa_c | PLAIN + ZSTD | 0.692 | 1.634 | 8.24 |
| stocks_usa_c | BYTE_STREAM_SPLIT + ZSTD | 0.712 | 2.390 | 26.89 |
| stocks_usa_c | ALP | 2.028 | 39.329 | 7.95 |
| **ALL AVG.** | **PLAIN** | **65.547** | **76.644** | **64.01** |
| **ALL AVG.** | **PLAIN + ZSTD** | **1.401** | **3.236** | **22.75** |
| **ALL AVG.** | **BYTE_STREAM_SPLIT + ZSTD** | **1.786** | **5.132** | **32.76** |
| **ALL AVG.** | **ALP** | **1.273** | **33.805** | **24.27** |

</details>

### Random access benchmark

> We also measured random access time for the encodings above. 

Reviewer: I will also try and make this into a chart

Time to decode 100 deterministic, uniformly distributed rows from `city_temperature_f` (lower is better). Each lookup starts from the encoded page.

| Parquet choice | 100 random rows (µs) |
|---|---:|
| PLAIN | 2.819 |
| PLAIN + ZSTD | 74317.077 |
| BYTE_STREAM_SPLIT + ZSTD | 27025.798 |
| ALP | 10.007 |

## Technical overview

### Decimal encoding

The core idea that ALP utilizes is that a lot of data that is represented as FLOAT/DOUBLE is not *real* FLOAT/DOUBLE and was originally DECIMAL that can be represented with an integer and an exponent. Let's follow the logic with a simple example.

> ALP finds the smallest integer and keeps an exponent and factor to return it to its decimal value.

Reviewer 4: I think we haven't explained `exponent and factor` so far.

It's okay because we introduce it only when we introduce the algorithm. So we might want to refer to it here (forward reference)
